
--- Page 1 ---
Curriculum Structure and Syllabus
of
Multi-Disciplinary Minor
in
Universal Human Values
(Academic Regulations 2023)
Pimpri Chinchwad Education Trust’s
PIMPRI CHINCHWAD COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
SECTOR NO. 26, PRADHIKARAN, NIGDI, PUNE 411044
(An Autonomous Institute Approved by AICTE and Affiliated to SPPU, Pune)
Effective from Academic Year 2024-25
--- Page 2 ---
Page | 2
Institute Vision
To be one of the top 100 Engineering Institutes of India in coming five years by offering exemplarily
Ethical, Sustainable and Value Added Quality Education through a matching ecosystem for building
successful careers.
Institute Mission
1. Serving the needs of the society at large through establishment of a state-of-art Engineering
Institute.
2. Imparting right Attitude, Skills, Knowledge for self-sustenance through Quality Education.
3. Creating globally competent and Sensible engineers, researchers and entrepreneurs with an ability
to think and act independently in demanding situations.
EOMS Policy
“We at PCCOE are committed to offer exemplarily Ethical, Sustainable and Value Added Quality
Education to satisfy the applicable requirements, needs and expectations of the Students and
Stakeholders.
We shall strive for technical development of students by creating globally competent and sensible
engineers, researchers and entrepreneurs through Quality Education.
We are committed for Institute’s social responsibilities and managing Intellectual property.
We shall achieve this by establishing and strengthening state-of-the-art Engineering Institute through
continual improvement in effective implementation of Educational Organizations Management
Systems (EOMS).”
--- Page 3 ---
Page | 3
Course Approval Summary
Board of Studies - Department of Applied Sciences and Humanities
Sr.
No. Name of the Course Course Code Page
number
Signature and stamp of BoS
chairman
1 Human Psychology:Realising Human
Potential BSH23MD19 9
2 Human Values in Madhyasth Darshan BSH24MD20 11
3 Vision for Humane Society (VFHS) BSH25MD21 13
4 Vision for Humane Society (VFHS)-
LAB BSH25MD22 15
5 Human Economics BSH26MD23 17
6 Holistic Vision of Life BSH27MD24 19
Approved by Academic Council:
Chairman, Academic Council
Pimpri Chinchwad College of Engineering
--- Page 4 ---
Page | 4
INDEX
Sr. No. Content Page No.
1 Preface 5
2 Curriculum Structure 6
3 Course Syllabus 8
4 Annexure 22
5 Vision and Mission of Applied Sciences and Humanities
Department 23
--- Page 5 ---
Page | 5
Preface
Welcome to the exciting, multidisciplinary world of the Minor in Universal Human Values, a program that aims
to enhance students' academic experiences in a variety of subject areas. This introduction explains the MDM's
goals, expected results, the department that offers it, and how students with different academic backgrounds can
use it.
The Multi-Disciplinary Minor in Universal Human Values is offered by the Department of Applied Sciences and
Humanities, recognizing the importance of integrating the study of human values with diverse academic
disciplines. The department is committed to providing a supportive and intellectually stimulating environment
where students can discover what is truly and innately valuable for them- in every aspect of life.
The salient features of the courses are:
1. They present a universal approach to value education by developing the right understanding of reality
(i.e., a worldview of reality “as it is”) through the process of self-exploration.
2. The courses are presented in the form of a dialogue whereby a set of proposals about various aspects of
reality are presented, and the students are encouraged to self-explore the proposals by verifying them
on the basis of their natural acceptance within themselves and validating experientially in living.
3. The prime focus throughout the courses is on affecting a qualitative transformation in the life of the
student rather than just a transfer of information. While introducing the holistic worldview and its
implications, a critical appraisal of the prevailing notions is also made to enable the students to discern
the difference on their own.
Employability:
It will have a direct impact on desirable, common graduate attributes, enhancing employability in the area of the
major degree.
Further, in the present state of increasing problems of human-human conflict, global warming, and climate
change, it will help prepare the urgently required technical professionals for sustainable and value-based living.
Upon completion of the MDM in Universal Human Values, students will
 Demonstrate increased self- discipline, greater sense of responsibility, and reduced need for external
enforcement.
 Develop a sense of commitment towards family and society.
 Cultivate a deep sense of gratitude for efforts made by elders, culture, and tradition.
 Develop the competence and commitment to live with fulfilment in every aspect of life.
The MDM in Universal Human Values is applicable to students from a wide range of academic departments,
including but not limited to:
 Mechanical Engineering
 Civil Engineering
 Electronics and Telecommunication Engineering
 Computer Engineering
 Computer Engineering (Regional)
 Computer Engineering (AIML)
 Information Technology
The main goal of the Universal Human Values Multi-Disciplinary Minor (MDM) is to enable students
to live a fulfilling life. Along with that, students will develop the ability to contribute meaningfully to
the family, society, and humanity at large.
We wish you happy exploration and an enriching learning experience!
--- Page 6 ---
Page | 6
Curriculum Structure
MDM in
Universal Human Values
--- Page 7 ---
Page | 7
CURRICULUM STRUCTURE
MDM in Universal Human Values (Academic Regulations 2023 )
(With effect from Academic Year 2024-25)
Course
Code Course
Name
Credit Scheme Teaching
Scheme
(Hours/Week)
Evaluation Scheme and Marks
L P T T
o
t
a
l
L P T FA SA TW PR OR Total
FA
1
FA
2
Semester III
BSH23MD1
9
Human
Psychology :
Realising
Human
Potential
2 - - 2 2 - - 10 10 30 - - - 50
Semester IV
BSH24MD20 Human
Values in
Madhyasth
Darshan
2 - - 2 2 - - 10 10 30 - - - 50
Semester V
BSH25MD21 Vision for
Humane
Society
3 - - 3 3 - - 20 20 60 - - - 100
BSH25MD22 Vision for
Humane
Society-Lab
- 1 - 1 - 2 - - - - 50 - - 50
Semester VI
BSH26MD23 Human
Economics 2 - - 2 2 - - 10 10 30 - - - 50
Semester VII
BSH27MD24 Holistic
Vision
of Life
- 4 - 4 - 8 - - - - 100 - 50 150
Total 9 5 - 14 9 10 - 50 50 150 150 - 50 450
L-Lecture, P-Practical, T-Tutorial, CIE–Continuous Internal Evaluation, FA-Formative Assessment,
SA-Summative Assessment, TW-Term Work, OR-Oral, PR-Practical
--- Page 8 ---
Page | 8
Course Syllabus
--- Page 9 ---
Page | 9
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester :III
Course : Human Psychology: Realising Human Potential Code: BSH23MD19
Credits
Teaching Scheme (Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutorial
FA
TW SA Total
FA1 FA2
2 2 - - 10 10 - 30 50
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To introduce students to the basic concepts of psychology with an emphasis on developing clarity
about full human potential
2. To initiate / strengthen the process of self-exploration, to become aware of themselves and also aware
socially
3. To generate interest, commitment and to make effort to realize their full human potential and become
responsible global citizens
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to:
1. Explain the basic concepts of psychology and efforts made to understand human psychology
2. Develop an understanding of the role of sanskar in the conduct of a human being
3. Examine a human being’s psychology when you have the right understanding
4. Appraise the concepts proposed in psychology and formulate the way forward
Detailed Syllabus:
Unit Descriptio
n
Duration
I
Introduction to Human Psychology:
● Process of Inquiry into Human Psychology-Self-Exploration,
● Human Being: an Existential Reality
● Role of Psychology in Day-to-Day Life.
06
II
Understanding Consciousness (Self)—Imagination and its Expression:
● Bases of Human behaviour, Work and Participation
● Sources of Motivation in the Self
● Role of Sanskar : Acceptance,Likes, and Dislikes
● Higher activities of the Self
08
III
Full Human Potential: Right Understanding and Guiding the
Imagination
● State of Imagination
● Possible Sources of Imagination
● Consequences of Imagination
● The Way Ahead: Ensuring Harmony in the Self by way of Self-Exploration
08
--- Page 10 ---
Page | 10
IV
Concepts in Psychology
● Theories in Psychology
● Comparative Study of Different Concepts Proposed in Psychology
● Personality Structure Theory-Sigmund Freud
08
Total 30
Text Books:
● A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics, R R Gaur, R Asthana, G P Bagaria,
2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1
● Passer, M.W. and Smith, R.E. (2010). Psychology: The science of mind and behaviour. New Delhi:
Tata McGraw-Hill
Reference Books:
● Psychology, Class XII, Published by NCERT
● aron, R. and Misra G. (2013). Psychology. New Delhi: Pearson
● Chadha, N.K., & Seth S. (2014). The Psychological Realm: An Introduction. New Delhi: PinnacleLearning
● Ciccarelli, S. K. and Meyer, G. E. (2010). Psychology: South Asian Edition. New Delhi: PearsonEducation
E-Resources:
● https://www.uhv.org.in/uhv-ii,
● http://uhv.ac.in, http://www.uptu.ac.in
● Gandhi A., Right Here Right Now, Cyclewala Productions
● https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQxWr5QB_eZUnwxSwxXEkQw
● https://fdp-si.aicte-india.org/8dayUHV_download.php
--- Page 11 ---
Page | 11
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester: IV
Course: Human Values in Madhyasth Darshan Code: BSH24MD20
Credit
Teaching Scheme (Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutoria
l
FA
TW SA TotalFA1 FA2
2 2 - - 10 10 - 30 50
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To help students understand the basic principles of Madhyasth Darshan
2. To help students understand existential realities, including human existence, through Madhyasth
Darshan
3. To help them see the participation of human beings in nature and existential realities (i.e. human
values) and therefore human conduct through each one of them
4. To help students apply this understanding to make their lives better at different levels (individual,
family, society and nature)
5. To facilitate the students in applying this understanding in their profession and leading an ethical
life.
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to:
1. Explain the basic concepts of Madhyasth Darshan
2. Develop a comprehensive understanding of the concept of the human being as an inseparable
component of nature within Madhyasth Darshan.
3. Interpret the human goal of realization within the context of Madhyasth Darshan.
4. Apply virtues and value to real-life situations
Detailed Syllabus:
Units Description
Duration
(Hrs)
I
Introduction to Madhyasth Darshan and its Basics
● Need to Study Madhyasth Darshan; Introduction
● Basic Formulations of Madhyasth Darshan
● Natural Outcome of Living According to Madhyasth Darshan
Submergence of Nature in Space
● Classification of Nature:Material and Consciousness
● The Four Orders of Nature: Form, Property, Natural Characteristics and
Self-Organisation
● Process of Evolution in Nature or Existence
7
II
Human Being as an Indivisible Part of Nature
● Understanding Humans as Integral Components of the Natural World.
● Classification of Human Beings
● Integration of Self and Body: Understanding the Holistic Nature of Human
Existence.
● Goals of Realization and Prosperity
● Behaviour and Work for Goal Attainment
8
--- Page 12 ---
Page | 12
III
Fulfilment of Human Goal of Realization
● Understanding Realization as the Ultimate Aim of Human Existence.
● Principles for Actualizing the Human Goal: Natural Principles, Social
Principles and Psychological Principles
● Conducive Society and Social Order
● Role of Community and Institutions
● Self-Study Process for Realization
7
IV
Human Conduct based on Madhyasth Darshan
● Characteristics of a Realized Self: Inner Peace, Harmony, and Contentment.
● Continuity of Happiness, Peace, and Satisfaction
● Conduct of a Realized Human Being:Ethical Conduct, Service-Oriented
Mindset, Exemplary Behaviour
● Present-Day Problems: Inequality, Gender Disparities, and Environmental
Degradation
8
Total 30
Text Books:
● Nagraj, A., “Manav Vyavahar Darshan”, Jeevan Vidya Prakashan, 3rd edition, 2003
Reference Books:
● Nagraj, A., “VyavaharvadiSamajshastra”, Jeevan Vidya Prakashan, 2nd edition, 2009.
● Nagraj, A., “AvartanasheelArthashastra”, Jeevan Vidya Prakashan, 1st edition, 1998.
E-Resources:
● https://madhyasth-darshan.info/introduction/background/
● http://www.youtube.com/@madhyasthdarshanjeevanvidy7260
● Al Gore, An Inconvenient Truth, Paramount Classics, USA
● https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQxWr5QB_eZUnwxSwxXEkQw
--- Page 13 ---
Page | 13
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester: V
Course: Vision for Humane Society (VFHS) Code: BSH25MD21
Credit
Teaching Scheme
(Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutoria
l
FA TW SA TotalFA1 FA2
3 3 - - 20 20 - 60 100
Prior Knowledge:Understanding Harmony and Ethical Human Conduct
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To help the students understand the values ensuring justice in human-human relationship
2. To develop the competence to think about the conceptual framework of human society, which
includes undivided society (relationship based) and universal human order (system based).
3. To help the students have exposure to transition from current state to humane society (an
undivided society with a universal human order)
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to:
1. Construct a conceptual framework for humane society based on relationship and harmony
2. Develop the competence to work as a team based on relationship in different dimensions of
life and society
3. Analyze the significance of feelings in ensuring justice in human-human relationships
4. Take part in formulating the steps for establishing a humane society (an undivided society
with a universal human order)
Detailed Syllabus:
Units Description Duration
(Hrs)
I
Introduction to the Course:
● Basic Aspiration of a Human Being and the Programme for its Fulfilment
● Need for family and Relationships for a Human Being
● Human-Rest of Nature Relationship and Role of Work in its Fulfilment
● Comprehensive Human Goal, Need for Undivided Society
● Need for Universal Human Order
● An Appraisal of the Current State
● An Appraisal of Efforts in this Direction in Human History.
9
--- Page 14 ---
Page | 14
II
Understanding Human-Human Relationship & its Fulfilment:
● Recognition of Human-Human Relationship
● Recognition of Feelings in Relationships and Interrelatedness of Feelings
● Established Values and Expressed Values in Relationships
● Types of Relationship and their Purpose
● Mutual Evaluation in Relationship
● Justice in Relationship
● Justice Leads to Culture, Civilization and Human Conduct.
9
III
Justice from family to world family order:
● Family order, continuity of culture and civilization
● Universal Order on the basis of an Undivided Society
● Conceptual Framework for Universal human order
● Universal Human Order as continuity and expanse of order in living: from
family order to world family order
9
IV
Program for Ensuring Undivided Society and Universal Human Order:
● Education– Sanskar
● Health – Self-Regulation
● Production-Work
● Exchange– Storage
● Justice-Preservation.
9
V
Human Tradition
● Scope and Steps of Universal Human Order
● Human Tradition (e.g. Family Order to World Family Order)
● Steps for Transitioning from the Current State
● Possibilities of Students’ Participation in this Direction
● Present Efforts in this Direction
9
Total 45
Text Books:
● A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics, R R Gaur, R Asthana,
G. P. Bagaria, 2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1
Reference Books:
● An Appeal by the Dalai Lama to the World: Ethics Are More Important Than Religion,Dalai Lama XIV, 2015.
● Human Society, Kingsley Davis, 1949.
● Integral Humanism, Deendayal Upadhyaya, 1965.
● Science & Humanism: towards a unified worldview, P. L. Dhar & R. R. Gaur (1990),Commonwealth Publishers, New Delhi
E-Resources:
● https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQxWr5QB_eZUnwxSwxXEkQw
● Story of Stuff, http://www.storyofstuff.com
--- Page 15 ---
Page | 15
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester: V
Course: Vision for Humane Society (VFHS) Lab Code: BSH25MD22
Credit
Teaching Scheme (Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutorial
FA
TW Oral TotalFA1 FA 2
1 - 2 - - - 50 - 50
Prior Knowledge: Understanding Harmony and Ethical Human Conduct
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To understand the significance of universal human values in promoting harmony, compassion, and
mutual respect in society.
2. To cultivate self-awareness, emotional regulation, and mindfulness practices for personal well-being
and societal harmony.
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to
1. Demonstrate increased self-awareness and accountability.
2. Demonstrate an understanding of environmental issues and implement sustainable living practices
to contribute to environmental harmony.
3. Apply strategies for promoting inclusivity and equity.
4. Analyse historical and contemporary movements for social justice
Detailed Syllabus:
Lab
Session Activities Duration
(Hrs)
1 Role-Playing Exercises: Simulate interpersonal interactions focusing on
compassionate communication, conflict resolution, and mutual respect 2
2
Group Discussions: Explore ethical dilemmas and scenarios to analyze the
impact of behaviour on human relationships. 2
3 Reflective Journaling: Students will reflect on their own behaviour and its 2effects on their relationships with others
4 Nature Immersion Activities: Outdoor excursions to connect with nature and 2engage in conservation efforts like tree planting
5
Sustainable Living Workshops:Practical skills such as gardening, composting,
and energy conservation to foster a harmonious relationship with the
environment
2
6 Community-Building Exercises: Team-building activities to foster a sense of
unity and cooperation among participants. 2
7 Dialogue Sessions: Open discussions on the societal barriers to unity and
brainstorm solutions for creating a more inclusive society. 2
8
Model United Nations Simulation: Students will play roles as delegates
representing different countries to discuss and negotiate global issues from the
perspective of universal human values.
2
--- Page 16 ---
Page | 16
9 Documentary Screenings: Watch and discuss documentaries highlighting
current social and environmental issues and efforts towards positive change. 2
10
Field Trips: Visit museums, historical sites, or community organizations
dedicated to social justice and human rights to gain firsthand insights into past
and present efforts for societal transformation. 2
11
Case Study Analysis: Examine historical movements and revolutions aimed at
social change, such as civil rights movements or women's suffrage, to
understand their successes and limitations. 2
12
Social Justice Forums: Discussions on topics related to social justice, equality,
and inclusivity, providing opportunities for dialogue and advocacy for a more
undivided society. 2
13 Mindfulness: Meditation sessions to promote self-awareness, emotional
regulation, and stress management. 2
14
Designing a health system for society that contributes to harmony at every
level. The student also needs to work out how he/she can contribute in this
system and process
2
15
Designing a plan for awareness campaigns, fundraising events, and community
outreach programmes to engage their peers and the wider community in efforts
towards a more equitable and harmonious world.
2
Total 30
--- Page 17 ---
Page | 17
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester: VI
Course: Human Economics Code: BSH26MD23
Credit
Teaching Scheme (Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutorial FA
TW SA Total
FA1 FA2
2 2 - - 10 10 - 30 50
Prior Knowledge: Understanding Harmony and Ethical Human Conduct
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To introduce students to the basic ideas about economic prosperity, which they can apply in
their day-to-day lives as responsible members of their family and as responsible citizens
2. To help students develop sensitivity to the economic issues in the development of the nation
and commitment to participate in resolving them
3. To equip the students with basic economic measures, tools and techniques to analyse economic
issues
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to:
1. Explain the basic concepts in human economics and the efforts made to
understand human economics
2. Choose sustainable and mutually fulfilling production and management systems
3. Analyse the role of economics in societal development
4. Appraise the concepts and notions proposed in economics and see the way forward
Detailed Syllabus:
Units Description
Duration
(Hrs)
I
Introduction to Human Economics
● Human Economics
● Vision for Universal Human Order and Role of Economics therein
● Human Needs and their Fulfilment
● Three Types of Economics
● Efforts in the Tradition and Modern Era to Understand Human Economics
● Role of Economics in Day-to-Day Life
7
II
Sustainable Ways of Wealth Generation and Sharing
● Meaning of Wealth
● Sustainable Ways of Wealth Generation (production)
● Preservation and Right Utilization of Wealth
● Feeling of Prosperity
● Tools and Techniques for Production and Management
7
--- Page 18 ---
Page | 18
III
Role of Economics in Societal Development
● Role of Different Societal Orders in Societal Development and their
Interdependence
● Contribution of Wealth and Economics to Overall Societal Order
7
IV
Appraisal of the Concepts in Economics and the Way Forward
● Evaluation of Present Day Notion of Human Needs, Natural Resources,
Wealth, Economics, etc.
● Inherent Contradictions and Dilemmas in Modern Day Management
9
Total 30
Text Books
● A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics, R. R. Gaur, R. Asthana, G. P.Bagaria, 2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1
● Macroeconomics, Textbook in Sociology for Class XII (2021–22), Published by NCERT
Reference Books:
● Julien-François Gerber and Rajeswari S. Raina (eds.). 2018. Post-Growth Thinking in India:
Towards Sustainable Egalitarian Alternatives, Orient Blackswan: New Delhi, ISBN:
9789352873937
● Dierksmeier, C. and M. Pirson (2009), Oikonomia and Chrematistike: Learning from Aristotleabout the Future of Management, Journal of Business Ethics, 88(3): 417–430.
● Introductory Microeconomics, Textbook for Class XII (2021–22), Published by NCERT
E-Resources:
● Charlie Chaplin, Modern Times, United Artists, USA
● IT Delhi, Modern Technology: The Untold Story
--- Page 19 ---
Page | 19
MDM : Universal Human Values Semester: VII
Course: Holistic Vision of Life Code: BSH27MD24
Credit
Teaching Scheme
(Hrs./Week) Evaluation Scheme
Lecture Practical Tutorial TW Oral Practical/
Project Total
4 - 8 - 150 50 - 200
Prior Knowledge: Understanding Harmony and Ethical Human Conduct
Course Objectives:
This course aims at enabling students,
1. To cultivate self-awareness by exploring their beliefs, values, strengths, weaknesses, and
aspirations.
2. To Cultivate global awareness and intercultural competence by exploring diverse
worldviews, cultures, and perspectives
3. Instill a sense of environmental responsibility and sustainability by examining the
interconnectedness of human society and the natural world.
4. To Foster critical thinking skills by examining complex issues from multiple perspectives
and questioning assumptions
Course Outcomes:
After learning the course, the students will be able to:
1. Demonstrate effective communication skills, including active listening, empathy, and
assertiveness.
2. Demonstrate an understanding of the connection between holistic well-being and overall
quality of life.
3. Demonstrate awareness of environmental issues and their impact on ecosystems and
communities.
4. Identify the interconnectedness of local and global communities and their responsibilities as
global citizens.
5. Develop strategies for personal growth and resilience in response to life's challenges.
6. Analyze complex issues from multiple perspectives and evaluate evidence to form reasoned
judgements.
Detailed Syllabus:
Units Description
Duration
(Hrs)
I
Values-Based Action Plan: Students will create a personal or group action
plan focused on promoting universal human values in their everyday lives.
They can set specific goals, outline strategies for achieving them, and track
their progress over time, reflecting on the impact of their actions on
themselves and others.
8
II
Values Reflection Journal: Students will keep a journal where they
reflect on different universal human values such as empathy, kindness,
honesty, and respect. Each week, they can choose a value to focus on and
write about how they demonstrated or experienced that value in their daily
lives.
8
--- Page 20 ---
Page | 20
III
Design Action-Oriented Projects:Students will identify specific areas for
improvement within their communities and develop actionable plans for
implementing positive change.
8
IV
Global Pen Pal Project: Students will connect with peers from different
countries or cultural backgrounds through pen pal exchange programs.
They will discuss topics related to universal human values in their letters
and learn from each other's perspectives on issues like friendship, family,
education, and social justice
8
V
Environmental Stewardship Project: Students will be involved in
initiatives such as recycling programs, community gardening, energy
conservation projects, and advocacy campaigns for environmental
protection.
8
VI
Community Service Project: Students will organize a community service
project that embodies one or more universal human values. This could
involve volunteering at a local homeless shelter, organizing a fundraiser for
a charity, or participating in a neighbourhood clean-up initiative.
8
VII
Digital Storytelling Project: Students will create digital stories (videos,
podcasts, blogs, etc.) that highlight real-life examples of universal human
values in action. They can interview people in their community, conduct
research, and present their findings in a creative and engaging way.
8
VIII
Cultural Exchange Project: Students from different cultural backgrounds
will do research and share aspects of their culture that promote universal
values. This could include traditions, stories, or rituals that emphasize
concepts like compassion, tolerance, or cooperation.
8
IX
Ethics in Media Analysis: Students will critically analyse media
representations of ethical issues, such as advertising, news coverage, and
entertainment. Students will examine the ethical implications of media
messages and how they shape perceptions, attitudes, and behaviour.
Students can then create their own media projects that promote ethical
storytelling and representation.
8
X
Gratitude Journaling Project: Students will commit to writing daily
reflections on things they are grateful for in their lives. Students will
explore the positive aspects of their experiences, relationships, and
surroundings, cultivating a mindset of gratitude and appreciation
8
XI
Organise community work projects that involve collective efforts to
address local needs and challenges. 8
--- Page 21 ---
Page | 21
XII
Awareness Program: Students will generate awareness for the utilisation
of surplus food and set up food and resource banks to facilitate the sharing
and distribution of surplus food, clothing, and household items within the
community.
8
XIII Empowerment:Empower people with knowledge and resources to
navigate legal systems and advocate for their rights and interests. 8
XIV
Community Service:Implement community service initiatives focused on
addressing social inequalities, environmental degradation, or other pressing
issues identified by students.
8
XV
Ethics in Innovation Challenge: Students will develop innovative
solutions to ethical dilemmas related to technology, business, or scientific
research. This project can involve interdisciplinary collaboration, design
thinking workshops, and prototyping activities to create ethical products,
services, or policies that contribute to the greater good.
8
Total 120
Suggested Projects:
● Values-Based Leadership Project: Identify a social issue or problem in college or
community and develop a values-based leadership project to address it. This could involve
organizing awareness campaigns, advocating for policy changes, or implementing sustainable
solutions that promote equality and justice
● Service Learning Projects: Students can participate in service learning projects that allow
them to address real-world problems while making a positive impact on their communities.
This could involve volunteering at local non-profits, conducting research on social issues or
organizing advocacy campaigns for social justice and equality.
● Holistic Health Fair: Host a holistic health fair where students can learn about different
wellness practices and holistic modalities that promote overall well-being. This could include
workshops on yoga, acupuncture, nutrition, herbal medicine, mindfulness, and stress
reduction techniques, providing students with practical tools for maintaining a balanced and
healthy lifestyle.
Text Books:
● A Foundation Course in Human Values and Professional Ethics, R R Gaur, R Asthana, G. P.Bagaria, 2nd Revised Edition, Excel Books, New Delhi, 2019. ISBN 978-93-87034-47-1
Reference Books:
● Science & Humanism: towards a unified worldview, P. L. Dhar & R. R. Gaur (1990),
Commonwealth Publishers, New Delhi
● C. and M. Pirson (2009), Oikonomia and Chrematistike: Learning from Aristotle about the
Future of Management, Journal of Business Ethics, 88(3): 417-430.
E-Resources:
● https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCQxWr5QB_eZUnwxSwxXEkQw
***
--- Page 22 ---
Page | 22
Annexure-I
Sr.
No. Course Code Course Title Semester Course
Credit
Academic
Year
Total
Marks
Total
Hours
1 BSH23MD19
Human
Psychology:Realising
Human Potential
III 2 2023-2024 50 30
2 BSH24MD20 Human Values in
Madhyasth Darshan IV 2 2024-2025 50 30
3 BSH25MD21 Vision for Humane
Society V 3 2025-2026 100 45
4 BSH25MD22 Vision for Humane
Society -LAB V 1 2025-2026 50 30
5 BSH26MD23 Human Economics VI 2 2026-2027 50 30
6 BSH27MD24 Holistic Vision of Life VII 4 2027-2028 200 120
--- Page 23 ---
Page | 23
Vision and Mission
Pimpri Chinchwad Education Trust’s
PIMPRI CHINCHWAD COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING
(An Autonomous Institute Approved by AICTE and Affiliated to SPPU, Pune)
Department of Applied Sciences & Humanities
Vision:
To provide value-added quality education that promotes essential technical skills, critical-thinking,
communication skills and human values to make impactful contributions to the society.
Mission:
Being a student-cetric department, our mission is -
1. To develop a strong base of engineering sciences through innovative and experiential learning.
2. To provide excellent harmony of conducive environment and moral support for joyful learning.
3. To strive for overall development of students by providing the right platform to nurture all
personality traits.
4. To create research attitude and endeavor innovation, creativity.
